Add Intel AVX-512 optimization blog (#3717)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-03-27-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Boost OpenSearch Vector Search performance with Intel AVX-512"
authors:
  - assanedi
  - ashankaran
  - mulugetam
  - noahstavely

>   - navtat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - naveen
```

Thus, in vector search using k-nearest neighbors (k-NN), index build times and vector search performance can be enhanced with the use of these new hardware extensions.

## The hot spot in OpenSearch vector search

Because of single instruction multiple data (SIMD) processing, AVX-512 helps reduce cycles spent in hot functions during indexing and search for both inner product and L2 (Euclidean) space types, especially notable in the FP32-encoded indexing. The next section describes the hot functions observed during an OpenSearch benchmark execution, and the corresponding improvements observed when the hot functions are vectorized using AVX-512. The baseline used is the AVX2 version of the Faiss library. The **% cycles spent** is the percentage of time spent by the CPU on the particular function during the benchmark run.

### Inner product space type

* **FP32 encoding:**  
  * Hot functions:  
    * *faiss::fvec\_inner\_product*   

>     * *faiss::fvec\_inner\_product\_batch\_4*.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * *faiss::fvec\_inner\_product\_batch\_4* 
```

  * Benefits of AVX-512:  

>     * Indexing: Up to 75% reduction in cycles.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Indexing: Up to 75% reduction in cycles
```

>     * Search: Up to 8% reduction in cycles.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Search: Up to 8% reduction in cycles
```

* **SQFP16 encoding:**  

>   * Hot function: *faiss::query\_to\_code*.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Hot function: *faiss::query\_to\_code*
```

  * Benefits of AVX-512:  

>     * Indexing: Up to 39% reduction in cycles.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Indexing: Up to 39% reduction in cycles
```

>     * Search: Up to 11% reduction in cycles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Search: Up to 11% reduction in cycles
```

> |  | Encoding | Function | %Cycle Spent (AVX2) | %Cycle Spent (AVX512) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows the percentage of total CPU cycles spent in key functions for indexing and search operations, comparing AVX2 and AVX-512 implementations.

|  | Encoding | Function | %Cycles spent (AVX2) | %Cycles spent (AVX512) |
```

| ----- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| Indexing | fp32 | fvec\_inner\_product | 28.86 | 7.32 |
| Indexing | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 17.95 | 10.94 |
| Search | fp32 | fvec\_inner\_product\_batch\_4 | 34.66 | 31.74 |
| Search | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 42.24 | 37.73 |

### L2 (Euclidean) space type

* **FP32 encoding:**  
  * Hot functions:   
    * *faiss::fvec\_L2sqr*   

>     * *faiss::fvec\_L2sqrt\_batch\_4*.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * *faiss::fvec\_L2sqrt\_batch\_4*
```

    * Search: Up to 6% reduction in cycles.

> |  | Encoding | Function | %Cycle Spent (AVX2) | %Cycle Spent (AVX512) |

Reviewer: Please move this table into the Inner product section

>     * Indexing: Up to 54% reduction in cycles.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Indexing: Up to 54% reduction in cycles
```

>     * Search: Up to 11% reduction in cycles.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Search: Up to 11% reduction in cycles
```

* **SQFP16 encoding:**  

>   * Hot function: *faiss::query\_to\_code*.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Hot function: *faiss::query\_to\_code*
```

  * Benefits of AVX-512:  

>     * Indexing: Up to 17% reduction in cycles.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Indexing: Up to 17% reduction in cycles
```

>     * Search: Up to 6% reduction in cycles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Search: Up to 6% reduction in cycles
```

> |  | Encoding | Function | %Cycle Spent (AVX2) | %Cycle Spent (AVX512) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table shows the percentage of total CPU cycles spent in key functions for indexing and search operations, comparing AVX2 and AVX-512 implementations.

|  | Encoding | Function | %Cycles spent (AVX2) | %Cycles spent (AVX512) |
```

![Search latencies fp16 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-search-latencies-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp16 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-indexing-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

### GIST-1M WITH fp32

Indexing operations demonstrate a 5% boost, while search throughput and latencies demonstrate a 2% and 6% improvement, respectively, compared to AVX2. While search throughput with the `gist-1m` dataset is not comparable to that of the `cohere-1m` dataset, the latency boost is maintained.

![Search QPS fp32 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-qps-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

![Search latencies fp32 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-latencies-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

> ![Indexing throughput fp32 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-indexing-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Indexing throughput fp32 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-indexing-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}
```

### GIST-1M WITH SQfp16

Indexing operations demonstrate a 15% boost, while search throughput and latencies both demonstrate a 7% improvement compared to AVX2.

![Search QPS fp16 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-qps-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Search latencies fp16 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-latencies-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

> ![Indexing throughput fp16 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-indexing-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Indexing throughput fp16 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-indexing-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}
```

### COHERE-10M WITH fp32

Indexing operations demonstrate a 8% boost, while search latencies demonstrate a 5% improvement compared to AVX2. Scaling search clients from 20 to 280 shows up to 12% QPS boost with AVX-512.

![Scaling search QPS fp32 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-scaling-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp32 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-indexing-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

### COHERE-10M WITH SQfp16

SQfp16 encoding with AVX-512 delivers a 6% performance boost in indexing and a 5% improvement in search latencies. Scaling search clients from 20 to 280 clients for throughput analysis shows up to a 13% QPS boost, with 10% lower latencies on average when using AVX-512.

![Search latencies fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-latencies-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

> ![Scaling search QPS fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-scaling-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Scaling search QPS fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-qps-scaling-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Boost OpenSearch Vector Search performance with Intel® AVX-512"
authors:
  - assanedi
  - ashankaran
  - mulugetam
  - noahstavely
  - navtat
  - vamshin
  - dylantong
date: 2025-03-27
has_science_table: true
categories:
  - technical-posts
meta_keywords: OpenSearch vector search, Intel AVX-512, Faiss library optimization, vector search performance, vector search benchmarks, vectorization in OpenSearch, COHERE-1M with fp32, gist-1m dataset is 
meta_description: Discover how Intel AVX-512 accelerates OpenSearch vector search performance with up to 13% faster search operations and 15% improved indexing throughput compared to AVX2.
---

> # Introduction

Author: do you want me to remove the meta_description here?

> # Introduction

Reviewer: Remove the "Introduction" heading. Our blogs start directly with the paragraphs, and the first paragraph is used as the blog excerpt.

Increasingly, application builders are using vector search to improve the search quality of their applications. This modern technique involves encoding content into numerical representations (vectors) that can be used to find similarities between content. With the rise in usage of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Generative AI (GenAI), the workloads have increased from millions to billions of vectors. With the rise in vector data, maintaining ingestion and query performance on such huge workloads becomes critical.

In this blog, we will share some results of some popular OpenSearch workloads using Intel AVX-512 vs AVX2, and compare their performance. The benchmarks were ran using  [OpenSearch Benchmark (OSB)](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) and showcase how Intel AVX-512 provides a performance boost over AVX2, for fp32 and fp16 quantization uing the Faiss library. The hardware accelerators are widely available on AWS, and 4th Generation Intel Xeon Scalable processors available as r7i were used for these benchmarks. 

> # Importance of vectorization in OpenSearch vector search

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The importance of vectorization in OpenSearch vector search
```

Vector search uses advanced techniques like cosine similarity, euclidean distance etc. to quickly and efficiently find similar items. This is especially useful in large datasets where traditional search methods would be slower. Furthermore vectorized data can be processed in parallel, making it highly scalable and ensuring that as the dataset grows, the search performance remains optimal. Intel AVX-512 can further improve the vector search throughput by processing more vectors. 

> #  **Why Intel AVX-512 performs better** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why Intel AVX-512 performs better
```

By registering double width to 512 bits, the use of ZMM registers over YMM registers can potentially double the data throughput and computational power. When AVX-512 extension is detected, the Faiss distance and scalar quantizer functions  process 16 vectors per loop compared to 8 vectors per loop for AVX2 extension. 
Hence in Vector Search with k-NN, index build times and vector search performance can be enhanced with the use of these new hardware extensions.

> #  **What is the hotspot in vector search using OpenSearch?** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The hot spot in OpenSearch vector search
```

    * Search: Up to 11% reduction in cycles.  
* **SQFP16 Encoding:**  
  * Hot function: *faiss::query\_to\_code*.  
  * Benefits of AVX-512:  
    * Indexing: Up to 17% reduction in cycles.  
    * Search: Up to 6% reduction in cycles.

| Inner Product space type |  |  |  |  |
| ----- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
|  | Encoding | Function | %Cycle Spent (AVX2) | %Cycle Spent (AVX512) |
| Indexing | fp32 | fvec\_inner\_product | 28.86 | 7.32 |
| Indexing | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 17.95 | 10.94 |
| Search | fp32 | fvec\_inner\_product\_batch\_4 | 34.66 | 31.74 |
| Search | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 42.24 | 37.73 |

| L2 space type |  |  |  |  |
| ----- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
|  | Encoding | Function | %Cycle Spent (AVX2) | %Cycle Spent (AVX512) |
| Indexing | fp32 | fvec\_L2sqr | 36.76 | 16.75 |
| Indexing | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 26.18 | 21.61 |
| Search | fp32 | fvec\_L2sqr\_bactch\_4 | 31.80 | 28.32 |
| Search | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 36.99 | 34.72 |

Starting with OpenSearch version 2.18, AVX-512 is enabled by default. As of March 2025, OpenSearch has shown best performance for AVX-512 on AWS r7i instances. 

> The next section describes benchmark results that were run with AVX2 and AVX-512 versions of the Faiss library shipped for x64 architecture ([Documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-index/#supported-lucene-methods:~:text=multiple%20of%208.-,x64%20architecture,libopensearchknn_faiss.so%3A%20The%20non%2Doptimized%20Faiss%20library%20without%20SIMD%20instructions.,-When%20using%20the)). These benchmarks were run using [OpenSearch Benchmark (OSB) vector search workload](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) using the following [Benchmark Configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/issues/3697#issuecomment-2771024897)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next section describes results of benchmarks run with AVX2 and AVX-512 versions of the Faiss library shipped for x64 architecture (for more information, see [SIMD optimization](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-methods-engines/#simd-optimization). These benchmarks were run using the [OSB vector search workload](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) and the following [benchmark configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/issues/3697#issuecomment-2771024897).
```

> ## **Results**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Results
```

> The results show that the time spent in hot functions of the distance calculation is significantly reduced due to AVX-512, and the OpenSearch cluster shows higher throughput on search and indexing. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The results show that the time spent in hot functions of the distance calculation is significantly reduced when using AVX-512, and the OpenSearch cluster shows higher throughput on search and indexing. 
```

> SQfp16 encoding provided by the Faiss library further helps with faster computation and efficient storage by compressing the 32-bit floating point vectors into 16-bit floating point format. The smaller memory footprints allows for more vectors to be stored in the same amount of memory while the operations on the 16-bits floats are typically faster than those on 32-bit floats, leading to quicker similarity searches. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQfp16 encoding provided by the Faiss library further helps with faster computation and efficient storage by compressing the 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floating-point format. The smaller memory footprint allows for more vectors to be stored in the same amount of memory. Additionally, the operations on the 16-bits floats are typically faster than those on 32-bit floats, leading to faster similarity searches. 
```

> A higher performance improvement is observed between AVX512 and AVX2 on fp16, due to code optimizations and the use of AVX-512 intrinsics in Faiss, which are not present on AVX2. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A greater performance improvement is observed between AVX512 and AVX2 on fp16 because of code optimizations and the use of AVX-512 intrinsics in Faiss, which are not present on AVX2. 
```

> A general observation across all benchmarks is that AVX-512 improves performance due to significant reduction in [pathlength](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instruction_path_length), which is the number of machine instructions needed to execute a workload. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A general observation across all benchmarks is that AVX-512 improves performance because of a significant reduction in [path length](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instruction_path_length)---the number of machine instructions needed to execute a workload. 
```

> ### **COHERE-1M WITH fp32**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### COHERE-1M WITH fp32
```

> Indexing operations see a 9% boost, while search throughput and latencies show respectively a 7% and 6% improvement compared to AVX2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indexing operations demonstrate a 9% boost, while search throughput and latencies demonstrate a 7% and 6% improvement, respectively, compared to AVX2.
```

> ![Search QPS fp32 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-search-qps-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

Reviewer: Please add introductory sentences for each image.

![Search latencies fp32 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-search-latencies-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp32 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-indexing-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

> ### **COHERE-1M WITH SQfp16**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### COHERE-1M WITH SQfp16
```

> Indexing operations see an 11% boost, while search operations and latencies both show a 10% improvement due to AVX-512 compared to AVX2. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indexing operations demonstrate an 11% boost, while search operations and latencies both demonstrate a 10% improvement when using AVX-512 compared to AVX2. 
```

> ![Search QPS fp16 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-search-qps-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

Reviewer: Please add introductory sentences for each image.

![Search latencies fp16 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-search-latencies-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp16 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-indexing-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

> ### **GIST-1M WITH fp32**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GIST-1M WITH fp32
```

> Indexing operations see a 5% boost, while search throughput and latencies show respectively a 2% and 6% improvement compared to AVX2. While search throughput with the gist-1m dataset is not comparable to cohere-1m dataset, the latency boost is maintained.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indexing operations demonstrate a 5% boost, while search throughput and latencies demonstrate a 2% and 6% improvement, respectively, compared to AVX2. While search throughput with the `gist-1m` dataset is not comparable to that of the `cohere-1m` dataset, the latency boost is maintained.
```

> ![Search QPS fp32 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-qps-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

Reviewer: Please add introductory sentences for each image.

![Search latencies fp32 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-latencies-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp32 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-indexing-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

> ### **GIST-1M WITH SQfp16**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GIST-1M WITH SQfp16
```

> Indexing operations see a 15% boost, while search throughput and latencies both show a 7% improvement compared to AVX2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indexing operations demonstrate a 15% boost, while search throughput and latencies both demonstrate a 7% improvement compared to AVX2.
```

> ![Search QPS fp16 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-qps-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

Reviewer: Please add introductory sentences for each image.

![Search latencies fp16 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-latencies-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp16 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-indexing-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

> ### **COHERE-10M WITH fp32**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### COHERE-10M WITH fp32
```

> Indexing operations see a 8% boost, while search latencies show 5% improvement compared to AVX2. Scaling search clients from 20-280 shows up to 12% QPS boost with AVX-512.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indexing operations demonstrate a 8% boost, while search latencies demonstrate a 5% improvement compared to AVX2. Scaling search clients from 20 to 280 shows up to 12% QPS boost with AVX-512.
```

> ![Scaling search QPS fp32 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-scaling-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

Reviewer: Please add introductory sentences for each image.

![Indexing throughput fp32 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-indexing-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

> ### **COHERE-10M WITH SQfp16**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### COHERE-10M WITH SQfp16
```

> SQfp16 encoding with AVX-512 delivers a 6% performance boost in indexing and a 5% improvement in search latencies. Scaling search clients from 20-280 clients for throughput analysis shows up to a 13% QPS boost, with 10% lower latencies on average due to AVX-512.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQfp16 encoding with AVX-512 delivers a 6% performance boost in indexing and a 5% improvement in search latencies. Scaling search clients from 20 to 280 clients for throughput analysis shows up to a 13% QPS boost, with 10% lower latencies on average when using AVX-512.
```

> ![Search latencies fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-latencies-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

Reviewer: Please add introductory sentences for each image.

![Scaling search QPS fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-scaling-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Scaling search latencies fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-latencies-scaling-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-indexing-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

These results show how the Intel AVX-512 optimizations in the Faiss library can help improve the performance of vector search in multiple OpenSearch workloads, with different dimensions and space types.

> # **Conclusion**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Conclusion
```

> We highlighted some hot functions that show up when performing vector search using Faiss, and how Intel AVX-512 accelerator provides a significant performance boost to OpenSearch by optimizing them.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we highlighted some hot functions that appear during vector search using the Faiss library and showed how the Intel AVX-512 accelerator significantly boosts OpenSearch performance by optimizing these functions.  
```

> Our experiments showed a performance boost to throughput of up to 15% for indexing and up to 13% for vector search in OpenSearch, when compared to previous generation AVX2 accelerators. Gains are seen across multiple vector dimensions and vector space types, and also improves query latencies 10% on average. These accelerators are present on Intel instances in most cloud environments including AWS, and can be used seamlessly with OpenSearch. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our experiments showed a throughput increase of up to 15% for indexing and up to 13% for vector search in OpenSearch, when compared to previous-generation AVX2 accelerators. Gains are seen across multiple vector dimensions and vector space types, and query latencies are improved by 10% on average. These accelerators are present on Intel instances in most cloud environments including AWS and can be used seamlessly with OpenSearch. 
```

> To get the most out of your OpenSearch cluster in AWS, consider using the Intel [C7i, M7i, R7i instances](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/) which contain the latest AVX-512 accelerators making them a great choice for vector search workloads. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To maximize performance in your OpenSearch cluster on AWS, consider using the Intel [C7i, M7i, or R7i instances](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/), which contain the latest AVX-512 accelerators, making them a great choice for vector search workloads. 
```

> # **Future Scope**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Future improvements
```

> To take this work further, we plan to use advanced features available on Intel 4th Generation Xeon Scalable and newer server processors. One of them will be leveraging [AVX512-fp16](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/content-details/669773/intel-avx-512-fp16-instruction-set-for-intel-xeon-processor-based-products-technology-guide.html) arithmetic for the scalar quantizer which is expected to further reduce search latencies and improve indexing throughput of Faiss SQfp16 (or 2x compression with `on_disk` mode). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build on this work, we plan to use advanced features available in Intel 4th Generation Xeon Scalable and newer server processors. One key improvement will be using [AVX512-FP16](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/content-details/669773/intel-avx-512-fp16-instruction-set-for-intel-xeon-processor-based-products-technology-guide.html) arithmetic for the scalar quantizer. This is expected to further reduce search latencies and improve the indexing throughput of Faiss SQfp16 (2x compression in `on_disk` mode).
```

> ## 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Notices and disclaimers
```

> **Notices and disclaimers**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Performance varies by use, configuration, and other factors. Learn more on the [Performance Index site](https://edc.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/performance/benchmarks/overview/). Performance results are based on testing as of dates shown in configurations and may not reflect all publicly available updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Search performance varies by use, configuration, and other factors. For more information, see the [Performance Index overview](https://edc.intel.com/content/www/us/en/products/performance/benchmarks/overview/). Performance results are based on testing as of the dates shown in the configurations and may not reflect all publicly available updates.
```

Intel technologies may require enabled hardware, software, or service activation.

Disclosure:

> Remember that performance can be highly dependent on factors like data structure, query patterns, indexes, and more. It's a good practice to test your application with different instance types and configurations to find the optimal setup that balances performance and cost for your specific use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember that performance can be highly dependent on factors like data structure, query patterns, indexes, and more. It's a good practice to test your application with different instance types and configurations in order to find the optimal setup that balances performance and cost for your specific use case.
```

---
layout: post

> title:  "Boost OpenSearch Vector Search performance with Intel AVX-512"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title:  "Boost OpenSearch vector search performance with Intel AVX-512"
```

meta_description: Discover how Intel AVX-512 accelerates OpenSearch vector search performance with up to 13% faster search operations and 15% improved indexing throughput compared to AVX2.
---

Introduced in OpenSearch 2.18, Intel Advanced Vector Extensions 512 (Intel AVX-512) is a set of new instructions that can accelerate vector workload performance. Vector search benchmarks using OpenSearch Benchmark showed performance boosts of up to 15% for indexing and up to 13% for search tasks when compared to the same workloads' performance using AVX2, a predecessor of the technology.

Increasingly, application builders are using vector search to improve the search quality of their applications. This modern technique involves encoding content into numerical representations (vectors) that can be used to find similarities between content. With the rise in usage of large language models (LLMs) and generative AI, the workloads have increased from millions to billions of vectors. Maintaining ingestion and query performance for such huge workloads becomes critical given the increase in vector data size.

> In this blog post, we will share the results of some popular OpenSearch workloads using Intel AVX-512 and AVX2 and compare their performance. The benchmarks were run using  [OpenSearch Benchmark](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) and showcase how Intel AVX-512 provides a performance boost over AVX2 for `fp32` and `fp16` quantization using the Faiss library. The hardware accelerators are widely available on AWS, and 4th Generation Intel Xeon Scalable processors available as r7i were used for these benchmarks. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we will share the results of some popular OpenSearch workloads using Intel AVX-512 and AVX2 and compare their performance. The benchmarks were run using [OpenSearch Benchmark](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) and showcase how Intel AVX-512 provides a performance boost over AVX2 for `fp32` and `fp16` quantization using the Faiss library. The hardware accelerators are widely available on AWS, and 4th Generation Intel Xeon Scalable processors available as r7i were used for these benchmarks. 
```

Author: done

> In this blog post, we will share the results of some popular OpenSearch workloads using Intel AVX-512 and AVX2 then compare their performance. The benchmarks were run using  [OpenSearch Benchmark](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) and showcase how Intel AVX-512 provides a performance boost over AVX2 for `fp32` and `fp16` quantization using the Faiss library. The hardware accelerators are widely available on AWS, and 4th Generation Intel Xeon Scalable processors available as r7i were used for these benchmarks. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we will share the results of some popular OpenSearch workloads using Intel AVX-512 and AVX2 and then compare their performance. The benchmarks were run using  [OpenSearch Benchmark](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) and showcase how Intel AVX-512 provides a performance boost over AVX2 for `fp32` and `fp16` quantization using the Faiss library. The hardware accelerators are widely available on AWS, and 4th Generation Intel Xeon Scalable processors available as r7i were used for these benchmarks. 
```

Author: I had that form before but then thought too many "and" would be bad, okay changing back

> 

Author: replaced it with "In this blog post, we will share the results of some popular OpenSearch workloads using Intel AVX-512 and AVX2 then compare their performance."

## The importance of vectorization in OpenSearch vector search

> Vector search uses advanced techniques like cosine similarity or Euclidean distance to quickly and efficiently find similar items. This is especially useful in the context of large datasets, for  which traditional search methods are slower. Furthermore, vectorized data can be processed in parallel, making it highly scalable and ensuring that as the dataset grows, search performance remains optimal. Intel AVX-512 can further improve the vector search throughput by processing more vectors. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Vector search uses advanced techniques like cosine similarity or Euclidean distance to quickly and efficiently find similar items. This is especially useful in the context of large datasets, for which traditional search methods are slower. Furthermore, vectorized data can be processed in parallel, making it highly scalable and ensuring that as the dataset grows, search performance remains optimal. Intel AVX-512 can further improve the vector search throughput by processing more vectors. 
```

## Why Intel AVX-512 performs better

The techniques used in vector search are computationally expensive, and Intel AVX-512 is well positioned to tackle these challenges. The accelerator can be used directly in several ways: 
- For writing native code using intrinsics
- In compiler optimizations, such as auto-vectorization

> The corresponding optimized assembly instructions are generated when the accelerator is correctly utilized. AVX2 generates instructions using YMM registers, and AVX-512 generates instructions using ZMM registers. Performance is enhanced by allowing ZMM registers to handle 32 double-precision and 64 single-precision floating-point operations per clock cycle within 512-bit vectors. Additionally, these registers can process eight 64-bit and sixteen 32-bit integers. With up to two 512-bit fused multiply-add (FMA) units, AVX-512 effectively doubles the width of data registers, the number of registers, and the width of FMA units compared to Intel AVX2 YMM registers. Beyond these improvements, Intel AVX-512 offers increased parallelism, which leads to faster data processing and improved performance in compute-intensive applications such as scientific simulations, analytics, and machine learning. It also provides enhanced support for complex number calculations and accelerates tasks like cryptography and data compression. Furthermore, AVX-512 includes new instructions that improve the efficiency of certain algorithms, reduce power consumption, and optimize resource utilization, making it a powerful tool for modern computing needs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The corresponding optimized assembly instructions are generated when the accelerator is correctly utilized. AVX2 generates instructions using YMM registers, and AVX-512 generates instructions using ZMM registers. Performance is enhanced by allowing ZMM registers to handle 32 double-precision and 64 single-precision floating-point operations per clock cycle within 512-bit vectors. Additionally, these registers can process eight 64-bit and sixteen 32-bit integers. With up to two 512-bit fused multiply-add (FMA) units, AVX-512 effectively doubles the width of data registers, the number of registers, and the width of FMA units compared to Intel AVX2 YMM registers. Beyond these improvements, Intel AVX-512 offers increased parallelism, which leads to faster data processing and improved performance in compute-intensive applications such as scientific simulations, analytics, and machine learning. It also provides enhanced support for complex number calculations and accelerates tasks like cryptography and data compression. Furthermore, AVX-512 includes new instructions that improve the efficiency of certain algorithms, reduce power consumption, and optimize resource utilization, making it a powerful tool for modern computing needs.

```

> The corresponding optimized assembly instructions are generated when the accelerator is correctly utilized. AVX2 generates instructions using YMM registers, and AVX-512 generates instructions using ZMM registers. Performance is enhanced by allowing ZMM registers to handle 32 double-precision and 64 single-precision floating-point operations per clock cycle within 512-bit vectors. Additionally, these registers can process eight 64-bit and sixteen 32-bit integers. With up to two 512-bit fused-multiply-add (FMA) units, AVX-512 effectively doubles the width of data registers, the number of registers, and the width of FMA units compared to Intel AVX2 YMM registers. Beyond these improvements, Intel AVX-512 offers increased parallelism, which leads to faster data processing and improved performance in compute-intensive applications such as scientific simulations, analytics, and machine learning. It also provides enhanced support for complex number calculations and accelerates tasks like cryptography and data compression. Furthermore, AVX-512 includes new instructions that improve the efficiency of certain algorithms, reduce power consumption, and optimize resource utilization, making it a powerful tool for modern computing needs.\

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The corresponding optimized assembly instructions are generated when the accelerator is correctly utilized. AVX2 generates instructions using YMM registers, and AVX-512 generates instructions using ZMM registers. Performance is enhanced by allowing ZMM registers to handle 32 double-precision and 64 single-precision floating-point operations per clock cycle within 512-bit vectors. Additionally, these registers can process eight 64-bit and sixteen 32-bit integers. With up to two 512-bit fused multiply-add (FMA) units, AVX-512 effectively doubles the width of data registers, the number of registers, and the width of FMA units compared to Intel AVX2 YMM registers. Beyond these improvements, Intel AVX-512 offers increased parallelism, which leads to faster data processing and improved performance in compute-intensive applications such as scientific simulations, analytics, and machine learning. It also provides enhanced support for complex number calculations and accelerates tasks like cryptography and data compression. Furthermore, AVX-512 includes new instructions that improve the efficiency of certain algorithms, reduce power consumption, and optimize resource utilization, making it a powerful tool for modern computing needs.
```

Author: Oh the backlash would act as a breakline, at least that was the intent

> By registering double width to 512 bits, the use of ZMM registers instead of YMM registers can potentially double the data throughput and computational power. When the AVX-512 extension is detected, the Faiss distance and scalar quantizer functions process 16 vectors per loop compared to 8 vectors per loop for the AVX2 extension. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By registering double width to 512 bits, the use of ZMM registers instead of YMM registers can potentially double the data throughput and computational power. When the AVX-512 extension is detected, the Faiss distance and scalar quantizer functions process 16 vectors per loop compared to 8 vectors per loop for the AVX2 extension.

```

Thus, in vector search using k-nearest neighbors (k-NN), index build times and vector search performance can be enhanced with the use of these new hardware extensions.

## The hot spot in OpenSearch vector search

> Because of single instruction multiple data (SIMD) processing, AVX-512 helps reduce the number of cycles spent on hot functions during indexing and search for both inner product and L2 (Euclidean) space types, which is especially notable in the FP32-encoded indexing. The next section describes the hot functions observed during an OpenSearch benchmark execution, and the corresponding improvements observed when the hot functions were vectorized using AVX-512. The baseline used is the AVX2 version of the Faiss library. **% Cycles spent** represents the percentage of time spent by the CPU on the particular function during the benchmark run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because of single instruction, multiple data (SIMD) processing, AVX-512 helps reduce the number of cycles spent on hot functions during indexing and search for both inner product and L2 (Euclidean) space types, which is especially notable in the FP32-encoded indexing. The next section describes the hot functions observed during an OpenSearch benchmark execution and the corresponding improvements observed when the hot functions were vectorized using AVX-512. The baseline used is the AVX2 version of the Faiss library. **% Cycles spent** represents the percentage of time spent by the CPU on the particular function during the benchmark run.
```

  * Hot functions:  
    * *faiss::fvec\_inner\_product*   
    * *faiss::fvec\_inner\_product\_batch\_4* 
  * Benefits of AVX-512:  
    * Indexing: Up to 75% reduction in cycles
    * Search: Up to 8% reduction in cycles
* **SQfp16 encoding:**  
  * Hot function: *faiss::query\_to\_code*
  * Benefits of AVX-512:  
    * Indexing: Up to 39% reduction in cycles
    * Search: Up to 11% reduction in cycles

The following table shows the percentage of total CPU cycles spent on key functions for indexing and search operations, comparing AVX2 and AVX-512 implementations.

|  | Encoding | Function | % Cycles spent (AVX2) | % Cycles spent (AVX-512) |
| ----- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| Indexing | FP32 | fvec\_inner\_product | 28.86 | 7.32 |
| Indexing | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 17.95 | 10.94 |
| Search | FP32 | fvec\_inner\_product\_batch\_4 | 34.66 | 31.74 |
| Search | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 42.24 | 37.73 |

### L2 (Euclidean) space type

* **FP32 encoding:**  
  * Hot functions:   
    * *faiss::fvec\_L2sqr*   
    * *faiss::fvec\_L2sqrt\_batch\_4*
  * Benefits of AVX-512:  
    * Indexing: Up to 54% reduction in cycles
    * Search: Up to 11% reduction in cycles

> * **SQFP16 encoding:**  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **SQfp16 encoding:**  
```

  * Hot function: *faiss::query\_to\_code*
  * Benefits of AVX-512:  
    * Indexing: Up to 17% reduction in cycles
    * Search: Up to 6% reduction in cycles

The following table shows the percentage of total CPU cycles spent on key functions for indexing and search operations, comparing AVX2 and AVX-512 implementations.

> |  | Encoding | Function | %Cycles spent (AVX2) | %Cycles spent (AVX-512) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|  | Encoding | Function | % Cycles spent (AVX2) | % Cycles spent (AVX-512) |
```

| ----- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
| Indexing | FP32 | fvec\_L2sqr | 36.76 | 16.75 |
| Indexing | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 26.18 | 21.61 |
| Search | FP32 | fvec\_L2sqr\_bactch\_4 | 31.80 | 28.32 |
| Search | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 36.99 | 34.72 |

Starting with OpenSearch version 2.18, AVX-512 is enabled by default. As of March 2025, OpenSearch has shown the best performance for AVX-512 on AWS r7i instances. 

> The next section describes the results of benchmarks run with AVX2 and AVX-512 versions of the Faiss library shipped for x64 architecture (for more information, see [SIMD optimization](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-methods-engines/#simd-optimization). These benchmarks were run using the [OpenSearch Benchmarj vector search workload](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) and the following [benchmark configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/issues/3697#issuecomment-2771024897).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next section describes the results of benchmarks run with AVX2 and AVX-512 versions of the Faiss library shipped for x64 architecture (for more information, see [SIMD optimization](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-methods-engines/#simd-optimization). These benchmarks were run using the [OpenSearch Benchmark vector search workload](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) and the following [benchmark configuration](https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/issues/3697#issuecomment-2771024897).
```

## Results

The results show that the time spent on hot functions of the distance calculation is significantly reduced when using AVX-512, and the OpenSearch cluster shows higher throughput for search and indexing. 

> SQfp16 encoding provided by the Faiss library further helps with faster computation and efficient storage by compressing the 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floating-point format. The smaller memory footprint allows for more vectors to be stored in the same amount of memory. Additionally, the operations on the 16-bit floats are typically faster than those on 32-bit floats, leading to faster similarity searches. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SQfp16 encoding provided by the Faiss library further helps with faster computation and efficient storage by compressing the 32-bit floating-point vectors into 16-bit floating-point format. The smaller memory footprint allows for more vectors to be stored in the same amount of memory. Additionally, the operations on the 16-bit floats are typically faster than those on the 32-bit floats, leading to faster similarity searches. 
```

A greater performance improvement is observed between AVX-512 and AVX2 on FP16 because of code optimizations and the use of AVX-512 intrinsics in Faiss, which are not present in AVX2. 

A general observation across all benchmarks is that AVX-512 improves performance because of a significant reduction in [path length](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instruction_path_length)---the number of machine instructions needed to execute a workload. 

> ### COHERE-1M with fp32

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### COHERE-1M with FP32
```

![Search latencies fp32 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-search-latencies-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp32 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-indexing-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

### COHERE-1M with SQfp16

Indexing operations demonstrate an 11% boost, while search operations and latencies both demonstrate a 10% improvement when using AVX-512 compared to AVX2. 

![Search QPS fp16 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-search-qps-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Search latencies fp16 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-search-latencies-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp16 for cohere-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-1m-indexing-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

> ### GIST-1M with fp32

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### GIST-1M with FP32
```

![Search latencies fp32 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-latencies-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp32 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-indexing-fp32.png){: .img-fluid}

### GIST-1M with SQfp16

Indexing operations demonstrate a 15% boost, while search throughput and latencies both demonstrate a 7% improvement compared to AVX2.

![Search QPS fp16 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-qps-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Search latencies fp16 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-search-latencies-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp16 for gist-1m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/gist-1m-indexing-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

> ### COHERE-10M with fp32

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### COHERE-10M with FP32
```

---
layout: post
title:  "Boost OpenSearch vector search performance with Intel AVX-512"
authors:
  - assanedi
  - ashankaran
  - mulugetam
  - noahstavely
  - naveen
  - vamshin
  - dylantong

> date: 2025-03-27

Author: done

    * Search: Up to 11% reduction in cycles.  
* **SQFP16 Encoding:**  
  * Hot function: *faiss::query\_to\_code*.  
  * Benefits of AVX-512:  
    * Indexing: Up to 17% reduction in cycles.  
    * Search: Up to 6% reduction in cycles.

| Inner Product space type |  |  |  |  |
| ----- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
|  | Encoding | Function | %Cycle Spent (AVX2) | %Cycle Spent (AVX512) |
| Indexing | fp32 | fvec\_inner\_product | 28.86 | 7.32 |
| Indexing | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 17.95 | 10.94 |
| Search | fp32 | fvec\_inner\_product\_batch\_4 | 34.66 | 31.74 |
| Search | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 42.24 | 37.73 |

| L2 space type |  |  |  |  |
| ----- | :---- | :---- | :---- | :---- |
|  | Encoding | Function | %Cycle Spent (AVX2) | %Cycle Spent (AVX512) |
| Indexing | fp32 | fvec\_L2sqr | 36.76 | 16.75 |
| Indexing | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 26.18 | 21.61 |
| Search | fp32 | fvec\_L2sqr\_bactch\_4 | 31.80 | 28.32 |
| Search | SQfp16 | query\_to\_code | 36.99 | 34.72 |

Starting with OpenSearch version 2.18, AVX-512 is enabled by default. As of March 2025, OpenSearch has shown best performance for AVX-512 on AWS r7i instances. 

> The next section describes benchmark results that were run with AVX2 and AVX-512 versions of the Faiss library shipped for x64 architecture ([Documentation](https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/knn/knn-index/#supported-lucene-methods:~:text=multiple%20of%208.-,x64%20architecture,libopensearchknn_faiss.so%3A%20The%20non%2Doptimized%20Faiss%20library%20without%20SIMD%20instructions.,-When%20using%20the)). These benchmarks were run using [OpenSearch Benchmark (OSB) vector search workload](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) using configuration in appendix1.

Reviewer 3: @assanedi we don't need appendix section anymore, directly link to that github issue comment here where you added the configuration

---
layout: post
title:  "Boost OpenSearch Vector Search performance with Intel® AVX-512"
authors:
- assanedi
- ashankaran

> - mulugetam

Reviewer 3: Can you add all the names in the authors list ?

Author: Naveen, here do I also add the AWS authors, and their photo, if so, is it okay to take your photo from other blog?

Reviewer 3: You don't need to add my photo and bio again as it is already checked into the repo. Just add these 3 names from opensearch side - navtat, vamshin, dylantong. The bio and photos already exists in the repo

Author: got it, I updated the blog and removed the markdown I had added for you

---
layout: post
title:  "Boost OpenSearch Vector Search performance with Intel® AVX-512"
authors:
  - assanedi
  - ashankaran
  - mulugetam
  - noahstavely
date: 2025-03-27
has_science_table: true
categories:
  - technical-posts

> meta_keywords: 

Author: the documentation said the marketing team at aws was adding those but I can do it

> meta_keywords: 

Reviewer 3: got it. Then let us ask them to add it

> meta_keywords: 

Reviewer 4: I wil provide you with the meta keywords and description

> meta_keywords: 

Reviewer 4: Please update the meta with the following: 

_meta_keywords:_ OpenSearch vector search, Intel AVX-512, FAISS library optimization, vector search performance,  vector search benchmarks, vectorization in OpenSearch, COHERE-1M with fp32, gist-1m dataset is

_meta_description:_ Discover how Intel AVX-512 accelerates OpenSearch vector search performance with up to 18% faster search operations and 15% improved indexing throughput compared to AVX2.

> meta_keywords: 

Author: done

# **Future Scope**

To take this work further, we plan to use advanced features available on Intel 4th Generation Xeon Scalable and newer server processors. One of them will be leveraging [AVX512-fp16](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/content-details/669773/intel-avx-512-fp16-instruction-set-for-intel-xeon-processor-based-products-technology-guide.html) arithmetic for the scalar quantizer which is expected to further reduce search latencies and improve indexing throughput. 

# **Appendix1**

[https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/issues/3697](https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/issues/3697)

Benchmark setup configuration is listed below: 

## Configuration

| Dataset | COHERE-1M | GIST1M | COHERE-10M |
| :---- | ----- | :---- | :---- |
| OpenSearch version | 2.18 |  |  |
| Engine | faiss |  |  |
| Vector dimension | 768 | 960 | 768 |
| Ingest vectors | 1M |  | 10M |
| Query vectors | 10K | 1K | 10K |
| Primary shards | 4 |  | 6 |
| Replica shards | 1 |  |  |
| Data nodes | 2 |  | 3 |

> | Cluster manager nodes | 1 |  |  |

Reviewer 3: For common configuration, can you change it to something like this
```suggestion
| Cluster manager nodes | 1  |
```

Author: Can you check the change to see if that works?

Reviewer 3: Can you try this and see if it works - https://stackoverflow.com/a/42091054

Reviewer 3: Looks like this is getting messed up. Let us take help of tech writers
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4acaaf4c-9553-4950-86a9-35d6af840206)

Author: Great, thank you for the help

Author: Configuration was added to github issue and the issue was linked in the blog results intro

meta_description: Discover how Intel AVX-512 accelerates OpenSearch vector search performance with up to 18% faster search operations and 15% improved indexing throughput compared to AVX2.
---

# Introduction

Intel® Advanced Vector Extensions 512 (Intel AVX-512) is a set of new instructions that can accelerate performance of vector workloads, and was introduced in OpenSearch 2.18. Vector search benchmarks using OpenSearch showed performance boosts up to 15% for indexing and up to 18% for search tasks, when compared to performance of the same workloads using AVX2, a predecessor of the technology. 

Increasingly, application builders are using vector search to improve the search quality of their applications. This modern technique involves encoding content into numerical representations (vectors) that can be used to find similarities between content. With the rise in usage of Large Language Models (LLMs) and Generative AI (GenAI), the workloads have increased from millions to billions of vectors. With the rise in vector data, maintaining ingestion and query performance on such huge workloads becomes critical.

> In this blog, we will share some results of some popular OpenSearch workloads using Intel AVX-512 vs AVX2, and compare their performance. The benchmarks were run using  [OpenSearch Benchmark (OSB)](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) and showcase how Intel AVX-512 provides a performance boost over AVX2, for fp32 and fp16 quantization used in the FAISS library. The hardware accelerators are widely available on AWS, and 4th Generation Intel Xeon Scalable processors available as r7i were used for these benchmarks. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this blog, we will share some results of some popular OpenSearch workloads using Intel AVX-512 vs AVX2, and compare their performance. The benchmarks were ran using  [OpenSearch Benchmark (OSB)](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-benchmark-workloads/tree/main/vectorsearch) and showcase how Intel AVX-512 provides a performance boost over AVX2, for fp32 and fp16 quantization using the Faiss library. The hardware accelerators are widely available on AWS, and 4th Generation Intel Xeon Scalable processors available as r7i were used for these benchmarks. 
```

Author: Done

![Search latencies fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-latencies-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Scaling search QPS fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-scaling-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Scaling search latencies fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-search-latencies-scaling-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

![Indexing throughput fp16 for cohere-10m dataset](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-03-24-Boost-OpenSearch-VectorSearch-Performance-With-Intel-AVX512/cohere-10m-indexing-fp16.png){: .img-fluid}

These results show how the Intel AVX-512 optimizations in the FAISS library can help improve the performance of vector search in multiple OpenSearch workloads, with different dimensions and space types.

# **Conclusion**

> When it comes to software performance for Opensearch, we base our work on the metrics: indexing throughput, search latencies and queries per second (qps) which are important to OpenSearch users. 

Reviewer 3: Let's remove this line

Author: Done

We highlighted some hot functions that show up when performing vector search using FAISS, and how Intel AVX-512 accelerator provides a significant performance boost to OpenSearch by optimizing them.  

> Our experiments showed a performance boost to throughput of up to 15% for indexing and up to 18% for vector search in OpenSearch, when compared to previous generation AVX2 accelerators. Gains are seen across multiple vector dimensions and vector space types, and also improves workload latencies by up to 12%. These accelerators are present on Intel instances in most cloud environments including AWS, and can be used seamlessly with OpenSearch. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our experiments showed a performance boost to throughput of up to 15% for indexing and up to 18% for vector search in OpenSearch, when compared to previous generation AVX2 accelerators. Gains are seen across multiple vector dimensions and vector space types, and also improves query latencies by up to 12%. These accelerators are present on Intel instances in most cloud environments including AWS, and can be used seamlessly with OpenSearch. 
```

Reviewer 3: @assanedi which dataset shows 12% improvement in query latencies ?

Author: @naveentatikonda the scaling data when benchmarking cohere-10M shows up to 12% improvement
<img width="1235" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a8668dd7-8e08-4004-99d7-756526d29614" />

Reviewer 3: Can you pls be more specific and tell the datapoint you are referring to and are we including that result to validate the datapoint in the blog ?

Reviewer 3: @assanedi ^

Author: Hi @naveentatikonda, I am referencing the row with 180 search clients for the cohere-10M dataset in the image above and that figure is in the blog under the cohere-10M results

Author: <img width="1213" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a8ed0f22-3ed1-47b2-bf68-e046bbd72d50" />

Author: I have highlighted  some of the results, and for the most part if you look at the column avx512/avx2, you can see we have up to 12%, even 13% performance improvement

Reviewer 3: But, that is for search throughput not the improvement in latency. But, in the conclusion it was written as 12% improvement in query latency

To get the most out of your OpenSearch cluster in AWS, consider using the Intel [C7i, M7i, R7i instances](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/) which contain the latest AVX-512 accelerators making them a great choice for vector search workloads. 

# **Future Scope**

> To take this work further, we plan to use advanced features available on Intel 4th Generation Xeon Scalable and newer server processors. One of them will be leveraging [AVX512-fp16](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/content-details/669773/intel-avx-512-fp16-instruction-set-for-intel-xeon-processor-based-products-technology-guide.html) arithmetic for the scalar quantizer which is expected to further reduce search latencies and improve indexing throughput. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To take this work further, we plan to use advanced features available on Intel 4th Generation Xeon Scalable and newer server processors. One of them will be leveraging [AVX512-fp16](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/content-details/669773/intel-avx-512-fp16-instruction-set-for-intel-xeon-processor-based-products-technology-guide.html) arithmetic for the scalar quantizer which is expected to further reduce search latencies and improve indexing throughput of Faiss SQfp16 (or 2x compression with `on_disk` mode). 
```

Author: Done

These results show how the Intel AVX-512 optimizations in the Faiss library can help improve the performance of vector search in multiple OpenSearch workloads, with different dimensions and space types.

# **Conclusion**

We highlighted some hot functions that show up when performing vector search using Faiss, and how Intel AVX-512 accelerator provides a significant performance boost to OpenSearch by optimizing them.  

Our experiments showed a performance boost to throughput of up to 15% for indexing and up to 18% for vector search in OpenSearch, when compared to previous generation AVX2 accelerators. Gains are seen across multiple vector dimensions and vector space types, and also improves query latencies by up to 12%. These accelerators are present on Intel instances in most cloud environments including AWS, and can be used seamlessly with OpenSearch. 

To get the most out of your OpenSearch cluster in AWS, consider using the Intel [C7i, M7i, R7i instances](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-types/) which contain the latest AVX-512 accelerators making them a great choice for vector search workloads. 

# **Future Scope**

> To take this work further, we plan to use advanced features available on Intel 4th Generation Xeon Scalable and newer server processors. One of them will be leveraging [AVX512-fp16](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/content-details/669773/intel-avx-512-fp16-instruction-set-for-intel-xeon-processor-based-products-technology-guide.html) arithmetic for the scalar quantizer which is expected to further reduce search latencies and improve indexing throughput of Faiss SQfp16 (or 2x compression with 'on_disk' mode). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To take this work further, we plan to use advanced features available on Intel 4th Generation Xeon Scalable and newer server processors. One of them will be leveraging [AVX512-fp16](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/content-details/669773/intel-avx-512-fp16-instruction-set-for-intel-xeon-processor-based-products-technology-guide.html) arithmetic for the scalar quantizer which is expected to further reduce search latencies and improve indexing throughput of Faiss SQfp16 (or 2x compression with `on_disk` mode). 
```

Reviewer 3: Use back ticks, not single quotes

Author: done
